---  
layout: post  
title: "A quantitative measure of sky brightness intensity"  
---  

(Probably not beating the autism diagnosis with this article)  

Some days, I get overwhelmed by how bright it is outside. This happens when the weather meets one of two conditions: 1) the sun is very intense, and/or 2) the sun is low-intensity but the cloud cover means that there is lots of glare.  

It'd be very straightforward to derive a "glare annoyingness index". All I would have to do is record how annoying I think the sky brightness is on a number of days, then generate a model that links the "glare annoyingness" outcome variable to proxies for sun intensity (e.g. UV index, which is freely available and easy to access for Australia on the ARPANSA website) and cloud cover (also easy to access). For the latter, you could also set up a real-time monitoring station that is pointed at the sky and automatically calculates the dark channel (as in the excellent "dark channel prior" method for haze removal in photographs created by He et al), which might be a good proxy of the sky's ability to create glare given some amount of sunlight.  

In particular, glare annoyingness would correlate with sun intensity in a positive, linear fashion, and it would correlate with cloud cover in a non-linear fashion (intermediate values of cloud cover seem to cause more glare).  

Fortunately, I can save myself the time! AccuWeather has this product called the ["AccuLumen Brightness Index"](https://www.accuweather.com/en/press/accuweather-introduces-first-of-its-kind-brightness-index/1594355). This product is proprietary. However, you can sign up for a free API account and then [use the API](https://developer.accuweather.com/accuweather-indices-api/apis) to query the Brightness Index for a particular location.  

For example, for the city Adelaide (ID = 25257) and the brightness index (ID = 47), if you have an API key, you can simply run in your computer's terminal:    

~~~  
curl -X GET http://dataservice.accuweather.com/indices/v1/daily/1day/25257/47?apikey=YOUR_API_KEY  
~~~  

Right now, it tells me that the brightness index is 6.0 (Medium). Neat!  
