---  
layout: post  
title: "Notes on anger"  
tags: philosophy self-improvement  
---  

Related posts:  
- [Be compassionate, but not a pushover]({% post_url 2023-08-19-be-compassionate-but-not-a-pushover %})  
- [Hesitate, but make it snappy]({% post_url 2024-05-02-hesitate %})  

Thich Nhat Hanh usually advises against ever expressing your anger outwardly. Some [quotes](https://plumvillage.app/thich-nhat-hanh-on-the-roots-of-anger/):  
- “We know that when anger manifests in us, we should not do anything, we should not say anything. Because doing or saying something out of anger will bring about negative things that will make us regret later.”    
- Does anger sometimes help? “[This question] has been asked so many times. In fact, if someone makes you angry, you should not try to suppress your anger because suppressing anger may be very dangerous. Using the energy of mindfulness to recognise your anger and embrace it tenderly is what we should do. Much safer.”  

I've also seen other Buddhist writers claiming that anger is counted as one of the "five poisons" or one of the "five hindrances". I'm certainly not a scholar of classical Buddhist texts, but [Wikipedia gives some guidance](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kleshas_(Buddhism)). Terms that have been translated into English include:  
- *[Pratigha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pratigha)*, "a hostile attitude towards sentient beings, towards frustration, and towards that which gives rise to one's frustrations"  
- *[Byāpāda](https://suttacentral.net/define/by%C4%81p%C4%81da?lang=en)*, though it seems to be better translated as "ill-will" or "malevolence", which have different connotations than anger does  
- *[Dvesha](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvesha)*, though again this is translated differently by different authors, with many translating this term as "hatred"  

So it's not super clear that the concept captured by the English word "anger", with all of its nuance, was obviously rejected by the Buddha or early Buddhist teachings. I'm sure the sutras are full of teachings on anger, and exploring these texts would provide useful insights, but I simply haven't read them all!  

In contrast, I've happened upon a couple of passages from modern writers. They certainly aren't writing from a Buddhist perspective, but I think there's still truth to what they're saying.  

Elaine N. Aron 2010, *The Undervalued Self*:  

> Anger is the emotion we feel when our boundaries or wishes have been violated. Those who undervalue themselves usually express their anger too little, when in fact, if they did express it, their boundaries or wishes would be respected. It can be unpleasant to feel angry, and often counterproductive to express it fully, but it can have many good effects when used well. Showing anger reminds others to obey the rules expected of everyone. [...] And it helps you stand up for yourself in a conflict, so that the resolution will be a good one for all involved.  

Katherine Cross 2021, The Radical Vulnerability of Trans Sex, *Gender Euphoria*:  

> The classical narrative of trans existence, necessitated by decades of social and medical conservatism, demands that we be ‘normal’ in every way but for being ‘born in the wrong body’. [...] But I did not transition to be the model of demure femininity, ever available to men’s whims; I transitioned to be myself.  

(That quote is actually in the context of a discussion about sexuality. But I think it holds in many areas of life, including anger.)  

Hmm!  
